This is Deborah Beale, and I am interviewing Dr.
Spencer Beane on the history of Texas Engineering
Experiment Station. The date is June 6, 1984. So
the first
thing, you did give a biographical statement in
that one interview. You had your fill in that one,
so I was going to make you go through that again if
you'd like to. But I would like you to update some of
the biography there. At that time, you were...
they were just setting up no
Since this is an update of the oral history that we
have,
I'll just kind of correct that. I had already been
the director over here at the Center for
International Support, and I had been
hand-in-hand, and I think it's probably worth it.
You've got the view in there that I... It was just
take over or something like that. Well, they did,
they had a little extra interest. They were still
successful students from that community. Yes, at
that time, it looked like I was going to be
full-time here, which I didn't. You could tell
that. Because I am an engineer. My loyalty is to
engineering. My objective in life was to be an
engineer and all those good things, and so I wanted
to do it. with the Ateez
organization and who
I am. So that's the
part that's really changed since 1981. I've been a
quarter-time engineering experiment station,
three-quarter-time here at the Center. And I
continue to get involved and
serve God and get people active and get people to
understand. I hope a million things because I
think that's what makes me very good. I think we're
solving problems. We're involved in solving
problems. And there's students involved in
solving problems and there are graduates because
they're involved in solving problems.
How
did you first become
successful
with these materials? Well, I had a Ph.D. from
Caltech in mechanical and electrical
engineering in 1950. I spent 20 years in the Army in
their missile research development. And in 1970,
I was only 50
years old and decided that if I wanted to have
a second career, I needed to be out of the Army. So I
was out of the Army. And I didn't have a job. But
because of my Caltech degrees,
And they made me a real good offer, but at the same
time living in Washington,
D.C., living in that area.
for five years during my 20 years of research
about the hectic nature of just getting to and from
work. And so we
didn't want to move back to the Forks. So I
interviewed also in the University of Alabama in
Huntsville. I later
moved here and I moved in Austin
and I offered a job in Austin and I offered a job
here. And I could have had a job in El Paso, but I
didn't want that. And being an Aggie, I decided I
wanted to come back to Texas A&M, come back home,
and help develop a research program in Texas A&M.
And I've done quite well, and I'm saying because of
me. I
feel like a part of it
anyway. Since 1970, our sponsored research
program, our global research program, has really
expanded. It's gratifying. I've been a part of all
this. Were you hired to be both assistant director
and head of the space, or did one develop out of the
other? I was hired as an assistant director and
head of space technology, but we
didn't make a big deal out of things like that.
Things kind of grew. I hit the ground, and as you
read in Billy Hathorne, the first project I worked
on had
nothing to do with space. It was the environmental
aspects of the building and the amount of solar
here. And I kind of did what they did. There weren't
a whole lot of us at that time. Mr. Benson was the
dean of engineering and the director, and Harriet
Whitmore was the associate director, and there
was me. And then we had a fiscal officer as well, who
was part legal. Mr. Fenner and Mr. Whitmore
and myself and
Mr. Henson. We just did what we needed to do. We
managed to stay busy and active and we managed to
get other people impacted and involved. So I would
say that the Kresge organization was involved
over the many years starting in 1940. I mean,
Spence thought that the industries and urban
populations of the state of Texas really needed
some technical help, as well as the rural people
being in the Gulf. I mean, it's evolved. I think
that the real growth,
indeed, started with Harry Whitson in 1963,
because Harry had been Army research
and
development also means familiar with how
contracting is done and the administrative
aspects of that. Plus, being an A&M in the core, you
learn the need for organization. You learn in the
Army the need for authority and organization,
follow-up, and the formality requirements of
contracting. So I think that our
main growth has come since the 1960s.
And then it's like I said, we're most of the shuttle
research grants. You read that in there. It was
$15,000 total. That's all we had. And I guess in the
final analysis, we've done about the same thing.
of shuttle related work. We're still doing
shuttle related work. So it's good that the folks
in that program have confidence in them and
confidence in our researchers. That's what makes
success. And A&M will be successful as long as they
can deliver quality results and get people that
want to do quality research. Who did you deal with
inside and outside of the team? Everybody.
Everybody? Anybody and everybody that wanted to
be involved in some research or we thought we
needed for some research. Like the Navasol
project, we have 45 professionals from all over
the university. And
they
were involved
in an extensive conference, one-week
conference. And then later, the consultant
started to play, to read the final report. To my
knowledge, that was the first major participant
in the project that anyone else had. You had direct
access to it. You didn't have to go through your
pay. I never... An organization, in my mind, is
something that is a guide for people to have a home
in the first place. But if you need to get outside
your organization, do it. You've got to know other
people outside your organization. You can't look
internally at them. Because
many of the complex
problems today require expertise from
veterinary homes, effects of lasers on the eyes,
effects of chemicals, toxicants, and so forth,
from humans and animals. It's got to involve a lot
of other people to do all the work. Have the
administrations at A&M been helpful in letting
you do that in a timely manner? Well, we get along.
And any organization, as complex as A&M, any
organization will work if people want to work. And
if people want to work together, they will work
together, in spite of problems, in spite of
bureaucracy, in spite of administrative
hang-ups and regulations that says thou shall
not. You can still use those regulations as a guide
to the norm, but if you have to make an exception and
you have to get an exception, go get it. If you just
accept no's all the time, you don't go anywhere.
You have to accept the challenges. I'll just use a
good example. The court happens to be sitting on my
desk
right now. And it just happened to be there because
I haven't seen it since. This project evolved from
one of our projects, or a number of our projects, in
December of 2011. Center for Environmental
Resources is an organization
that serves throughout the university system. We
have projects with Tom and Alex, and we have
projects with Prairie View, Forest Service, and
the Coastal Recruitment Station. Wherever a
researcher is who wants to do something, And if we
can help him with small amounts of money, or
providing him with contacts with sponsors and
outside organizations,
or help him just develop an inquisitiveness into a
subject, we do it. The project that I'm looking at
is a $500,000 a year project for three years in the
agricultural and family space. And Dr. Hyler is
the principal investigator and has a contract
with the Gas Research Institute. And as I said,
many of the parts of this project came from those
seed projects, those encouragements that we've
given to researchers, not only in agriculture,
but in engineering. They've got guys on here from
engineering who are participating, Guy Curry, an
engineer, an industrial engineer, system
engineering, We have, uh, helping these people
also are folks from . But here's an example of
cooperation that has paid off. All of these
researchers, and this researcher,
I think they're, uh, uh, like 19 researchers in a
separate project. And it's a good thing because,
uh, It's looking at new alternate resources for
the future, new ways of developing crops to
produce energy, things like gas,
natural gas, in the case of gas recertification.
But you can't always stay within your own
organization with a crop. We've got to get people
from other disciplines involved. Is that what
TEAS has been all about since you came here? TEAS
has been growing in a lot of different ways. A lot of
our projects have been interdisciplinary and
based on cooperation with others. We've
had
projects with them at college, and with
agriculture, and with science, and, you know,
sometimes that doesn't go anywhere for people to
work with. But they've got to want to work with you,
or they will not. It's a matter of developing that
attitude. Has that attitude improved or stayed
the same pretty much since you've been here, or has
it gotten worse? Well, right at the present time,
we're having some organizational difficulties.
We've got people starting to sit and wait. I would
say that right at the present time, we are at some
crossroads. People have got to want to work, do
research, and they've got to want to do it within
the system that exists. Or they spend their time in
a wasteful circle, fighting
the system. And I don't like that. I think
people... with a can-do attitude, wanting to do
things, are going to find ways to make the
organization work. I mean, any organization will
work if people want to. And I'm upset about that.
Because we've got people who are wasting time
arguing about it. Is that something that's
happened on and off since you've been here, or is
this a new development? Well, there's always been
some of that. There are always people. University
is a unique place because there are unique people.
There are all kinds of people. There are some
people who are going to stand up and argue against
anything and everything. And then there are going
to be those on the other end who are going to stand up
and fight for everything. Some people are naive.
Some people are positive. Some people want to do
research. Some people don't want to do research.
Some people think that research detracts from
their scholastic achievements. Some other
people think that research is essential. to their
development and to their achievement in the human
profession. And there's all a great spectrum of
people in the world, all classes, all kinds. And
it's a real challenge to present opportunities to
do things through this broad spectrum and see the
different responses that you get from people. I
think that psychologists, But it's a big role in
university research. And that's where I spend
most of my time, I guess I should say, on doing just
that. I have given seminars. I've considered
teaching in mechanical
engineering. It's a part-time
job. I've worked in the M.T.' 's administration.
I've worked with air in the plane. I've worked with
all the federal agencies and all the
quasi-agencies. Yes, we're a research
institute. I decided I'd just take it, but I didn't
have the time to do that. Try
to
teach a bunch of students and then you have to leave
town and not do a good job. I didn't teach. Trying to
find opportunities for people to do research. And
many times being disappointed by not being able to
find people to do research on projects where there
was a great opportunity outside. But that's the
way things go. Well,
my attitude is that
students were on the future of this nation and
trained and empowered by our first reason for
being here. And I think I've adopted the attitude
that I've heard written by many people, including
Bill, and all these other associations, the
National Science Foundation, the U.S. National
Science Foundation, The
attitude seems to be developing that a good
university must be
involved in research. And that if A&M is to be an
outstanding university, its professors must be
involved, its students
must be involved. So my attitude has been that A,
our first loyalty, our first purpose for being is
the student. But then in turn, the professors
are the professors. And the students are better
than graduates
if they've been involved in a research project,
because then they learn that continued success
depends upon producing acceptable results. And
it's all part of a training for a leadership role in
the future. I was involved for many years with the
co-op. I think it's an excellent, excellent
opportunity for a youngster, regardless of his
financial status, to get an education and learn
the outside world at the same time. Many times, the
industries that hire that go out during the
alternate
periods end up hiring them for a long time . And the
student's happier working for a company that he
knows, and the company's happier because they
know the student because he's worked for them. But
I was very much involved in that when we were closer
together with the College of Engineering. I have
the, on the steak prize, industrial sponsors
would provide the steaks. And the wives
of the faculty, and the team's wives too, would
bring cakes and different vegetables and things.
And we'd have a picnic out in the park, the pencil
park or over there. right
at the center or wherever. And I would get the
students together and say, okay, now you go get the
stakes, and you go get the wood for the fire, and you
go get the tongs, and you go get this. And we'd get
over there a couple hours early and we'd cut those
stakes up and get them ready and took them. We had a
lot of fun. In fact, we got together a lot. And I
think those sorts of things I
did
this sort
of
thing, and I participated with the American
Society of Engineering Education, and was on the
Engineering Research Council for a year, because
I felt like I needed to know the faculty. I needed to
interact with the faculty. They needed to know me,
so I involved myself in a co-op program that Texas
Society of Education was doing here, and the
American Association of Engineering Advancing
the Core of Engineering Education. And all those
sort of things. So, I've enjoyed it. I love it. I
love it. I want to continue to have that baggy
spirit. Stand together. It's the heavy thing. So
will any arguments about organization make me
upset? Because I think we can continue our
progress and make these organizations work. We
want to. And as Aggies by and large, we've got to
work. We've got to have a solid force. We've got to
produce. Because we're going to be successful if
we do. The Center for Energy and Mineral Resources
is not a part of TEES. It's a university line item in
the budget. It's not administered by TEES? No, it
is not part of TEES at all. It is not part of TEES at
all. It is completely separate from TEES. But it
has a total system-wide responsibility. And as
long as that continues, I'm happy. If somebody
wants to say, now you can't give any projects to
engineering. You can't give any to agriculture,
because they're already there. or funded
organization that eliminates developing people
who have the potential of really doing something.
Because in a larger organization, a lot of times
the man's
eyes don't get understood. Maybe we can help them
be heard, be understood.
Then they can shine. The keys can profit.
That guy, big research project. Agriculture, big
research project. And so I think that CEMR, It
brings forth
to me that A&M
is a real
strong company.
The
mid-1970s energy crisis,
did that bring on a squirt of money and funds for
energy research? Well, it brought on the
legislature supporting this center, which was
started in 75.
Did Keith get involved in that type of research as
well? Well, Keith is involved in that. A
lot
of
the researchers over there are doing
engineering. You can talk to some engineers and
say everything that engineers do is
engineering-based. If you're working on an
engine, you're trying to make it more efficient.
If you're working on a chemical process, you're
trying to make it more efficient, energy-wise.
All the chemical processes use natural gas for oil
and for aerobics and electronics. Electrical
engineering. generation of electricity is
mostly by fossil fuel. That's got to be more
efficient. So everything that the engineers do
whether
it be robotics, manufacturing
engineering, is involved in . Yes, I'd say that the
energy related work in engineering and in
agriculture and in many parts of the system needs
75%. Have
you found in your working with Tease that there's
been, Tease has seen the problems before, at least
the legislature or a lot of other people, the
problems that need to be addressed? Well, I think
we think more through the future than the
legislators do sometimes. And I think that given
the resources that the legislature gives to TEAS
allows TEAS to reflect on the future and to be
involved in all these outside organizations and
to be able to assess some of the future needs of the
country and to start
start getting
together
capabilities to help solve some of those kinds of
problems or some of those kinds of developments,
do some exploratory work. You see, the TEAS
professors are a faculty member. A lot of them are
doing basic research, fundamental research. I
remember doing a lot of research,
solving problems
in a short period of time. But others are looking
at, why does this do this? And it's a longer term
payoff. It may not even be payoff. It's basic
research. You don't know what the end result is
going to be like. It might be a
new design for a new car. Completely
different from the configuration
of the ones we've had in the past. They might fly the
shuttle backwards instead of with the nose
pointed forward. Or somebody comes up with a new
theory that this has to happen. Everybody says it
won't work. And some guy goes out and makes it work.
I don't like people who have negative attitudes.
I've already judged that. And I know people who say
it can't be done. Because if you say that somebody
can't do something, you're not bringing them up.
Maybe a new theory will come. What I'm saying is
that the engineering researchers are involved in
the basic studies of what I think both of them need.
And A&M, I think, has built its reputation based
upon practical engineers, practical
graduates,
practical managers of the future. I think that
Ford at one time sent a vice president out there and
down here to look at A&M and find out why is A&M, why
are A&M graduates good? Why do we have 34 in our top S
and bottom three? Why are 34 good? How
do you go about finding
the funds for it? Well,
it's a matter of salesmanship. convincing people
that Aggies will be willing
to try. We ran a workshop here for a gas research
institute about three years ago. And we, I think,
sold it based upon the attitude that, well, it's a
darn difficult task to do in such a short period of
time.
But we're willing to undertake it. And we will
deliver it. And we did deliver it. It's like one,
two, three, four. We did finally deliver a quality
product. And as a result of good relationships
with the National Research Institute, projects
like this helped us. Let me just
say that TEAS is not just engineering.
TEES started out being basically engineering.
It's called the Engineering Experiment Study.
But now the College of Education is involved with
TEES and UCI technology for education purposes.
Let's face it, satellites and microelectronics
can play a part in disseminating information
worldwide. We have classrooms in Nairobi that use
satellites. But at any
rate, education, liberal arts, geosciences,
and who else? I was thinking of you. Well,
we've got geosciences, liberal arts, business
administration, business administration and
education. Or the four other colleges. So about
half of the colleges are now involved in TEAS
research. And in addition to that, TEAS is on an
outreach type of program. It's now a development
program with Arlington, University of Texas at
Arlington, cooperating in microelectronics
and things like that, like research. Are those
cooperations at the instigation of TEAS, or are
these organizations coming to TEAS and saying...
Well, I think this first started with TEAS at the
instigation. But it just so happens that John
Rouse, who's the Dean of Engineering up there, was
the director of our own census team. So he's fully
familiar with the TEAS organization and that
helped bring in the cooperative agreement, which
was approved by our Board of Regents, by the
University of Texas Board of Regents, so we
cooperated in this research. What about the
different schools in A&M? Are the new programs at
the instigation of this little business that they
can take? In some cases, I think so. Based upon Dr.
Bill Mews' interest in bringing forth new
opportunities for the professors in business
administration, he, I think, got together with
Skip Porter and decided give
professors over there in economics and whatever
management opportunities to participate. Where
did he switch from what, and I'm not sure what the
definition is, from technology research to high
tech research? Is there a
difference? There's not a difference. Like I mean
it's a matter of definition. Like basic research
is a matter of definition. What is basic research?
What is applied research? Some of the research
done over there in the Food Protein Research and
Development Center using diverse osmosis,
different types of membranes, separating
proteins of various lengths of chains and that
sort of thing. Well, it's applied, but you have to
have some fundamental knowledge of what it is
you're doing in order to make these membranes
work. And they've come up with some separation
processes now that are going to revolutionize the
food industry. Whereas before we were throwing
out a lot of it, of ways and stuff that she's making,
we're going to save all that stuff. And that's
going to cut down on the pollution requirements
for waste treatment plants and save food stuff
that makes the food industry more efficient. One
of the researchers over in the food protein
research in Melbourne now has a patent that's with
the Japanese involved. And that's going to be very
helpful to him So what's the
difference between tech and high tech? Well, high
technology right now is defined by many people as
involving computers and solid state
electronics. Solid state electronics involves
an integrated circuit and making things smaller
and smaller with larger and larger capacity. The
larger and larger the capacity of one of these
chips makes a computer that much more capable. And
that's the high tech. But biotechnology has also
got a high tech flavor. And in that case, they're
taking cloning
cloning some of the DNA and the bio-chains and the
genes are being split and put back together.
Things are just getting,
just getting, I think, solid. It's just really
another term for progress. I think so. I think, you
know, we had an information explosion many years
ago. We still got information. Technology
transfer is still one of our goals. problems
and racism, I'd say.
Dissemination of information adopted by the
industries in Texas or other nations making a more
competitive agenda. When you were involved in the
case in the 70s, how did you go about it? What were
cheese methods of disseminating information? We
had the and
then
Windows replaced that and put it in a new format and
hired some new people and
some quality
writers and some artists who really have made it in
the first class. One of the shortfalls, I think, of
our publications is that we are not real sure of our
dissemination list or who to send it to. People in
important places who should get it change all
the time, every time. Organizations change. And
it's darn difficult to keep up with it. I have the
same problem over here. We were sending out close
to 10,000 copies of our Texas Energy newsletter
that was published 10 times a year, and now it's
published six times a year. And we purged the list
and started all over, and it went down to 3,500, and
now we're back up to 1,500. People read it.
Who
would you be? Are you sending out to industry and
any other? Industry, other schools,
other researchers. University of Texas sent us a
copy of . We try to outdo each other, and there's
nothing wrong with competition. The remote
sensing system was established in 68. Is that part
of the space technology mission? It was a separate
center, but a close connection . Now I understand
that we're going to sort of change the purpose of
remote sensing. And I have not had anything to do
with this. I'm against it. I
believe
the remote sensing potential is only going to be
scratched. We will be doing many, many more things
with remote sensing information, whether it be
manufacturing processes, looking at Earth from
space, looking at space from Earth, or whatever.
But it's now going to have the flavor of high tech,
high level technologies. It's
going to be more
centered than I like to call it. Fantastic.
Agriculture, using remote sensing, just since
the soil moisture content in agriculture, the
count of heat fields in the room, and since the
condition of our guys.
Yeah.
Well,
they just made the
decision to take it out of the law firm. So they used
to ask us to do that. $50,000 contract, I think it
was. that we had
was the first project. And then closed because
the emphasis was all on supersonic flight.
Low-speed vehicles were not needed. And all of a
sudden, they are being used and are needed for
testing offshore platforms. Surface effect
machines, and signs, and roof ventilators, and
reunion towers for Dallas. Offshore
drilling. All kinds of things. There's a lot of
activity out there. General aviation. You
know, the ones that build the executive jets and
the two-engine planes and things are not mobile.
We're trying to improve performance, improve
energy efficiency, and that sort of thing. And the
one kind of thing we're aiming for in the grad
program is that. What about the nuclear science?
You know, when we came to Cybertron, we just
couldn't do it.
Nuclear
Science Center is disappointing
because I tried to get them more involved in
research. I think there's a real need for more
research involving tracers. We use the tracers
for studying corrosion. You can
oil
field
production and sour gas fields, sour gases and .
And you can measure the rate of decomposition of
the production pumps and the drills and things
down the hole if you use your science center
tracers. And also you can use neutrons to Neutron
radiography
is
a way of detecting flaws in composite materials
that are fake due to other extrovert techniques.
So neutron radiography is a very important thing.
More research into the problem. But at the center
right now, we're just having problems with the
Cauch-Kofstra. and
they have
not aggressively gone out into the city, outside.
I'm not going to be involved in the city at all, but
right now it looks like the Richard Sons Center
would like to go as a part of the university because
they feel like they would be better received as far
as paying their bills.
The T's is operating on the philosophy that people
should pay attention to.